Transaction amount calculations (#1416)
saleor/saleor-docs: docs/developer/payments/price-calculations.mdx

---
title: Price calculations
---

> This document provides an overview of how various transaction amount fields in a `TransactionItem` are calculated and influenced. Additionally, it provides details on how the totalBalance is calculated for Checkout and Order entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document provides an overview of how various transaction amount fields in a `TransactionItem` are calculated and influenced. Additionally, it provides details on how `totalBalance` is calculated for Checkout and Order entities.
```

## Transaction Amount Fields Overview

The following fields are calculated based on transaction events and their types:

- **`authorizedAmount`**: The total amount successfully authorized.
- **`chargedAmount`**: The total amount successfully charged.
- **`refundedAmount`**: The total amount successfully refunded.
- **`canceledAmount`**: The total amount successfully canceled.
- **`authorizePendingAmount`**: The total amount of pending authorizations.
- **`chargePendingAmount`**: The total amount of pending charges.
- **`refundPendingAmount`**: The total amount of pending refunds.
- **`cancelPendingAmount`**: The total amount of pending cancellations.

> ### Assumptions

Reviewer: suggestion: I think it would be easier to read if we put Assumptions section **after** a brief explanation how does the amount calculation even works, what this is.

```suggestion
### Summary

When the transaction amounts are recalculated, firstly all values are set to zero, 
then the calculations are applied in the following order:
  1. recalculate amounts based on events without PSP reference
  2. recalculate amounts based on `AUTHORIZATION` events
  3. recalculate amounts based on `CHARGE` events
  4. recalculate amounts based on `REFUND` events
  5. recalculate amounts based on `CANCEL` events

### Assumptions
```

#### 1. Event Grouping:
  - Events are grouped based on their PSP reference and type of action (e.g., authorization, charge).
  - Grouping ensures that events of the same type and PSP reference are properly matched to calculate amounts accurately.
#### 2. Pending Amounts:

>   - pending amounts (`authorizePendingAmount`, `chargePendingAmount`, `refundPendingAmount`, `cancelPendingAmount`) are increased only if a `REQUEST` event exists for the corresponding PSP reference.

Reviewer: suggestion: typo

```suggestion
  - Pending amounts (`authorizePendingAmount`, `chargePendingAmount`, `refundPendingAmount`, `cancelPendingAmount`) are increased only if a `REQUEST` event exists for the corresponding PSP reference.
```

  - If a success or failure event is also associated with the same PSP reference, the system assumes the requested amount has already been processed, and the pending amount will not be increased.
#### 3. `SUCCESS` and `FAILURE` Events:
  - The transaction amount (e.g., `authorizedAmount`, `chargedAmount`) is increased only when a `SUCCESS` event exists.
  - If both a `SUCCESS` and `FAILURE` event are present for the same PSP reference, the system compares their creation timestamps:

> 	- If the `FAILURE` event is newer, the `SUCCESS` event is ignored.
> 	- If the `SUCCESS` event is newer, it is used for the calculations.

Reviewer: suggestion: indentation

```suggestion
		- If the `FAILURE` event is newer, the `SUCCESS` event is ignored.
		- If the `SUCCESS` event is newer, it is used for the calculations.
```

#### 4. Events Without PSP References:

>   - Some events (e.g., those created by the system to maintain correct amounts) may not have a PSP reference.
>   - The events of the following types are still included in the transaction amounts and influence the calculated values:
>     - `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`
>     - `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`
>     - `CHARGE_SUCCESS`
>     - `CHARGE_BACK`
>     - `REFUND_SUCCESS`
>     - `REFUND_REVERSE`
>     - `CANCEL_SUCCESS`

Reviewer: suggestion: stylistic change, so that it's clear "some events" are these listed below (I got confused by this while reading 🙈)

```suggestion
  - Not all events are required to have a PSP reference, however they still are included in the transaction amount calculation:
    - `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`
    - `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`
    - `CHARGE_SUCCESS`
    - `CHARGE_BACK`
    - `REFUND_SUCCESS`
    - `REFUND_REVERSE`
    - `CANCEL_SUCCESS`
```

I also don't understand the part: "e.g. those created by the system to maintain correct amounts" - when such things happen? When calling `transactionUpdate`?

#### 5. Adjustment Events:

>   - The `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`, overwrite previous amounts, if an adjustment is present,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`, overrides previous amount from previous `AUTHORIZATION` events, this means that if an adjustment is present,
```

  older authorization events are ignored, and the adjusted amount becomes the new authorized value.

This logic ensures that transaction amounts reflect the current state of the transaction based on its event history while accounting for both processed and pending actions.

### Calculation Details

When the transaction amounts are recalculated, firstly all values are set to zero, 
then the calculations are applied in the following order:
  1. recalculate amounts based on events without PSP reference
  2. recalculate amounts based on `AUTHORIZATION` events
  3. recalculate amounts based on `CHARGE` events
  4. recalculate amounts based on `REFUND` events
  5. recalculate amounts based on `CANCEL` events

#### Authorized Value ([`transactionItem.authorizedAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemauthorizedamountmoney---))

>   - When an `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS` event occurs and there is no `AUTHORIZATION_FAILURE` or the `FAILURE` event is older: value increases by the `SUCCESS` event's amount.
>   - When an `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT` event occurs: value is overwritten by the adjustment's amount.
>   - When a `CHARGE_REQUEST` or `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event occurs: value is reduced by the event's amount. 
>   - When a `CANCEL_REQUEST` or `CANCEL_SUCCESS` event occurs: value is reduced by the event's amount. 
>   - The amount cannot be negative, the minimum value is 0.

Reviewer: suggestion: I think we should use given > when > then format for such description, and avoid using "occurs" for events, because we recalculate history on each change.

This way I thin that I've found we are missing some info in this paragraph:
- **WHEN** CHARGE_REQUEST and CHARGE_SUCCESS reduce `authorizedAmount`: I think such event must be **after** authorization and they both must have the same pspReference? I also think there cannot be `CHARGE_FAILURE` event?
- **WHEN** CANCEL_REQUEST and CANCEL_SUCCESs reduce `authorizedAmount`: same thing, it must be **after** authorization event? and there cannot be CANCEL_FAILURE event?

```suggestion
  - **GIVEN** there is an `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS` event
    - **WHEN there is NO** `AUTHORIZATION_FAILURE`
    - **OR WHEN** the `AUTHORIZATION_FAILURE` event is older than `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`
      - **THEN** value increases by the `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS` event's amount.
  - **GIVEN** an `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT` event
    - **WHEN** it's the latest event of this type
      - **THEN** value is overwritten by the `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT` event amount.
  - **GIVEN** `CHARGE_REQUEST` or `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event:
    - **THEN** value is reduced by the event's amount. 
  - **GIVEN** `CANCEL_REQUEST` or `CANCEL_SUCCESS` event:
    - **THEN** value is reduced by the event's amount.
  - **GIVEN** all calculations were performed and we have result `authorizationAmount`
    - **WHEN** calculated `authorizationAmount` is below `0`
  	  - **THEN** `authorizationAmount` is set to `0` (it cannot be lower than 0)
```

Author: Done

#### Authorization Pending Value ([`transactionItem.authorizePendingAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemauthorizependingamountmoney---))

>   - When an `AUTHORIZATION_REQUEST` event occurs and there is no `AUTHORIZATION_FAILURE` or `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS` event is: value increases by the `REQUEST` event's amount.

Reviewer: question: aren't we missing here CANCEL and CHARGE events as well? I think they also lower the pending amount

#### Charge Value ([`transactionItem.chargedAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemchargedamountmoney---))
  - When an `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event occurs and there is no `CHARGE_FAILURE` or the `FAILURE` event is older: value increases by the `SUCCESS` event's amount.
  - When a `CHARGE_BACK` event occurs: value decreases by the event's amount.
  - When a `REFUND_REQUEST` or `REFUND_SUCCESS` event occurs: value is reduced by the event's amount. 
  - When a `REFUND_REVERSE` event occurs: value is increased by the event's amount. 

>   - The value can be negative.REFUND_REVERSE

Reviewer: fix: typo

```suggestion
  - This value can be negative.
```

>   - The value can be negative.REFUND_REVERSE

Reviewer: suggestion: I would add this note, so that it's clear **this value doesn't change after CANCEL**

```suggestion
  - The value can be negative.REFUND_REVERSE
  
:::note
Please note that `chargedAmount` isn't impacted by `CANCEL` events - these are only meant for matching with `AUTHORIZATION` event
:::
```

#### Charge Pending Value ([`transactionItem.chargePendingAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemchargependingamountmoney---))

>   - When an `CHARGE_REQUEST` event occurs and there is no `CHARGE_FAILURE` or `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event is: value increases by the `REQUEST` event's amount.

Reviewer: question: isn't this value impacted by refund and chargeback as well?

Author: No, `CHARGEBACK` does not influence `charge_pending_amount`

> #### Refunded Value ([`transactionItem.refundedAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemrefundedamountmoney---))

Reviewer: question: doesn't CHARGEBACK event also increase `refundedAmount`? if not then we can add a note:

```
:::note
Note that `CHARGEBACK` events which work similarly to a refund (decreases chargedAmount value), are not included in **refundedAmount**, since they were not triggered by merchant, but billed by issuing bank.
:::
```

Author: Note added

  - When an `REFUND_SUCCESS` event occurs and there is no `REFUND_FAILURE` or the `FAILURE` event is older: value increases by the `SUCCESS` event's amount.
  - When a `REFUND_REVERSE` event occurs: value decreases by the event's amount.

#### Refund Pending Value ([`transactionItem.refundPendingAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemrefundpendingamountmoney---))
  - When an `REFUND_REQUEST` event occurs and there is no `REFUND_FAILURE` or `REFUND_SUCCESS` event is: value increases by the `REQUEST` event's amount.

#### Canceled Value ([`transactionItem.canceledAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemcanceledamountmoney---) )
  - When an `CANCEL_SUCCESS` event occurs and there is no `CANCEL_FAILURE` or the `FAILURE` event is older: value increases by the `SUCCESS` event's amount.

#### Cancel Pending Value ([`transactionItem.cancelPendingAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemcancelpendingamountmoney---))
  - When an `CANCEL_REQUEST` event occurs and there is no `CANCEL_FAILURE` or `CANCEL_SUCCESS` event is: value increases by the `REQUEST` event's amount.

> ## Total Balance Calculation

Reviewer: question: maybe we should put it in **Payment lifecycle** docs page, since it also has explanation for `authorizeStatus` and `chargeStatus`, so this would nicely fit into these docs? (they also have formulas that explain it similarly to this description).

I have PR open to add more 😄 
https://github.com/saleor/saleor-docs/pull/1379/files

> The `totalBalance` represents the difference between the total amount charged (including pending charges) and the expected total cost.

Reviewer: suggestion: swapping these two makes it more clear, that `totalBalance` is about the _amount left to be paid_

issue: "including pending charges" is not valid for Order, so maybe we shouldn't put it here? 🤔 

```suggestion
The `totalBalance` represents the difference between the expected total cost and the total amount charged (including pending charges).
```

Author: The pending amount are also include in order calculations for `total_balance`.

This balance indicates whether the customer has overpaid (positive balance) or underpaid (negative balance) for the order.

Below is an explanation of how `totalBalance` is computed.

### Total balance for Checkout ([`checkout.totalBalance`](/api-reference/checkout/objects/checkout#checkouttotalbalancemoney---))

For a Checkout, `totalBalance` reflects the remaining balance after considering the total checkout cost, charged amounts, and pending charges.
It is calculated as the difference between the sum of all successful and pending charges across associated transactions and the checkout’s total price:

```
totalBalance = totalCharged - checkout.totalPrice
```

where:
```
totalCharged = (
    sum(transaction.chargedAmount for transaction in transactions)
    + sum(transaction.chargePendingAmount for transaction in transactions)
)
```

### Total balance for Order ([`order.totalBalance`](/api-reference/orders/objects/order#ordertotalbalancemoney---))

> For an Order, `totalBalance` represents the remaining balance after accounting for the total order cost, charged amounts, and refunds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an Order, `totalBalance` represents the remaining balance after accounting for the total order cost, charged amounts, and granted refunds.
```

> For an Order, `totalBalance` represents the remaining balance after accounting for the total order cost, charged amounts, and refunds.

Reviewer: question: what is total order cost? can we use instead a field from GraphQL? is it `Order.total.gross.amount`?

- **`cancelPendingAmount`**: The total amount of pending cancellations.

### Calculation process

When the transaction amounts are recalculated, firstly all values are set to zero, 
then the calculations are applied in the following order:
  1. recalculate amounts based on events without PSP reference
  2. recalculate amounts based on `AUTHORIZATION` events
  3. recalculate amounts based on `CHARGE` events
  4. recalculate amounts based on `REFUND` events
  5. recalculate amounts based on `CANCEL` events

### Assumptions

#### 1. Event Grouping:
  - Events are grouped based on their PSP reference and type of action (e.g., authorization, charge).
  - Grouping ensures that events of the same type and PSP reference are properly matched to calculate amounts accurately.
#### 2. Pending Amounts:
  - Pending amounts (`authorizePendingAmount`, `chargePendingAmount`, `refundPendingAmount`, `cancelPendingAmount`) are increased only if a `REQUEST` event exists for the corresponding PSP reference.
  - If a success or failure event is also associated with the same PSP reference, the system assumes the requested amount has already been processed, and the pending amount will not be increased.

> #### 3. `SUCCESS` and `FAILURE` Events:

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't be also good to mention that in case of the SUCCESS, the amount will be subtracted from the "previous" value? 
I mean, we have a transaction with event `AUTHORIZE_SUCCESS` and amount 100. TR has authorizedAmount:100, chargedAmount:0. Then we receive the event CHARGE_SUCESS and amount: 100. The 100 will have an impact on authorizedAmount. TR will have: authorizedAmount:0, chargedAmount:100 (as we subtracted the amount from CHARGE_SUCCESS from authorizedAmount and added it to chargedAmount)

Reviewer 2: Okay, I see that you deeply explained it below. So the question is: Do you think, that this is wort also to mention it here?

Author: I added a note about that in `Calculation process` part

  - If both a `SUCCESS` and `FAILURE` event are present for the same PSP reference, the system compares their creation timestamps:
    - If the `FAILURE` event is newer, the `SUCCESS` event is ignored.
    - If the `SUCCESS` event is newer, it is used for the calculations.
#### 4. Events Without PSP References:
  - Not all events require a PSP reference, but they are still included in the transaction amount calculation. The following events do not need a PSP reference:
    - `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`
    - `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`
    - `CHARGE_SUCCESS`
    - `CHARGE_BACK`
    - `REFUND_SUCCESS`
    - `REFUND_REVERSE`
    - `CANCEL_SUCCESS`
#### 5. Adjustment Events:
  - The `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`, overrides previous amount from previous `AUTHORIZATION` events, this means that if an adjustment is present,
  older authorization events are ignored, and the adjusted amount becomes the new authorized value.

This logic ensures that transaction amounts reflect the current state of the transaction based on its event history while accounting for both processed and pending actions.

> ### Calculation details

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth explicitly say, that we are talking about the events returned by APP - I mean, events that have `psp_reference` provided by App. For example, you could still see `X_request` event created by Saleor when calling the app, but it is not included in calculations until receiving at least psp_refernce from payment app 🤔

Reviewer 2: I might not be clear here. 
I was meaning the situation when saleor creates X_REQUEST event (like calling charge-request, or refund-request). The event's amount will not be included in calculations until receiving the SUCCESS response from the app. As this action is called asynchronously (I mean a situation when calling this action from dashboard), we can have a TR like:
TR: chargedAmount 100, refundAmount:0
Event1: amount: 100, type CHARGE_SUCCESS, pspRef:123
Event2: amount: 100, type: REFUND_REQUEST, pspRef:null 

As event2 was created by Saleor, and we're proceeding the refund request right now, the transaction.chargedAmount , transaction.refundedAmount are not impacted.

Author: I added a note about that

    - **THEN** value is reduced by the event's amount.
  - **GIVEN** all calculations were performed and we have result `authorizationAmount`
    - **WHEN** calculated `authorizationAmount` is below `0`
  	  - **THEN** `authorizationAmount` is set to `0` (it cannot be lower than 0)

#### Authorization Pending Value ([`transactionItem.authorizePendingAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemauthorizependingamountmoney---))
  - **GIVEN** there is an `AUTHORIZATION_REQUEST` event:
    - **WHEN** there is no `AUTHORIZATION_FAILURE` or `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`
      - **THEN** value increases by the `AUTHORIZATION_REQUEST` event's amount

#### Charge Value ([`transactionItem.chargedAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemchargedamountmoney---))
  - **GIVEN** there is a `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event
    - **WHEN** there is no `CHARGE_FAILURE`
    - **OR WHEN** the `CHARGE_FAILURE` event is older than `CHARGE_SUCCESS`
      - **THEN** value increases by the `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event's amount.
  - **GIVEN** there is a `CHARGE_BACK` event
    - **THEN**value is reduced by the event's amount

>   - **GIVEN** there is a `REFUND_REQUEST` or `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event:  

Reviewer 2: Shoudln't be `REFUND_SUCCESS`? 🤔

### Assumptions

#### 1. Event Grouping:
  - Events are grouped based on their PSP reference and type of action (e.g., authorization, charge).
  - Grouping ensures that events of the same type and PSP reference are properly matched to calculate amounts accurately.
#### 2. Pending Amounts:
  - Pending amounts (`authorizePendingAmount`, `chargePendingAmount`, `refundPendingAmount`, `cancelPendingAmount`) are increased only if a `REQUEST` event exists for the corresponding PSP reference.
  - If a success or failure event is also associated with the same PSP reference, the system assumes the requested amount has already been processed, and the pending amount will not be increased.
#### 3. `SUCCESS` and `FAILURE` Events:
  - The transaction amount (e.g., `authorizedAmount`, `chargedAmount`) is increased only when a `SUCCESS` event exists.
  - If both a `SUCCESS` and `FAILURE` event are present for the same PSP reference, the system compares their creation timestamps:
    - If the `FAILURE` event is newer, the `SUCCESS` event is ignored.
    - If the `SUCCESS` event is newer, it is used for the calculations.
#### 4. Events Without PSP References:

>   - Not all events require a PSP reference, but they are still included in the transaction amount calculation. The following events do not need a PSP reference:

Reviewer 2: IMHO this could be misleading, We have two ways of handling the transactions:
a) TransactionInitialize & TransactionProcess & transactionEventReport - flow which can be embedded in checkout process, where Saleor is a "proxy" between front and payment-app
b) TransactionCreate & TransactionUpdate - protected mutation that allows you to create and modify the transaction. 

The `a)` always requires the psp-reference as the whole calculation process requires it. For example, we don't allow the app to not return the psp-reference with success.  The whole flow relies on the psp-refences.

For `b)` when calling `transactionCreate` with chargedAmount:100,  we create the new events: to be able to re-calculate the amounts, but it is our inside logic. As a result of `transactionCreate` mutation, you expect to get a proper values in `transaction.xAmount` fields. The events without psp-reference is the "side-effect" of this action, as we want to be able to re-calculate the values. My point here is that we don't offer any API that would allow you to provide the event explicitly without psp-refence, which would be included in calculations.

So IMHO listing the `X_SUCCESS` events could be misleading, as someone could assume that `a)` flow would not require the psp-refence (which is not true). 

Maybe we could consider changing the section name, to say that in case of using `transactionUpdate`/`transactionCreate`, the events will not have a psp-refernce, and how we handle them 🤔

    - `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`
    - `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`
    - `CHARGE_SUCCESS`
    - `CHARGE_BACK`
    - `REFUND_SUCCESS`
    - `REFUND_REVERSE`
    - `CANCEL_SUCCESS`
#### 5. Adjustment Events:
  - The `AUTHORIZATION_ADJUSTMENT`, overrides previous amount from previous `AUTHORIZATION` events, this means that if an adjustment is present,
  older authorization events are ignored, and the adjusted amount becomes the new authorized value.

This logic ensures that transaction amounts reflect the current state of the transaction based on its event history while accounting for both processed and pending actions.

### Calculation details
:::note
Events like `X_REQUEST`, generated by Saleor when calling the payment app, are excluded from calculations until a corresponding event with a valid `psp_reference` is received from the payment app.
For example, an `AUTHORIZATION_REQUEST` event will not affect the calculations until an `AUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS` or a similar event containing a `psp_reference` is returned by the payment app.
:::

> #### Authorized Value ([`transactionItem.authorizedAmount`](/api-reference/payments/objects/transaction-item#transactionitemauthorizedamountmoney---))

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth mentioning that the below calculation flows are for the events with the same psp-refence?
For example:
```
- **GIVEN** there is a `CHARGE_SUCCESS` event
     - **WHEN** there is no `CHARGE_FAILURE`
```
We can have `CHARGE_SUCCESS` with PSP:123, and `CHARGE_FAILURE` with PSP:ABC. In that case FAILURE will not have any impact on SUCCESS, as PSP is different
